---
layout: post
title: Assuming assumptions
tagline: managing state
category : work 
draft: true
tags : [SymPy]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

SymPy has two assumptions systems unimaginatively called "old assumptions" and "new assumptions."  They differ in their management of mathematical attributes.

### Old Assumptions

In old assumptions attributes are bound to variables

    >>> x = Symbol('x', positive=True)
    >>> y = Symbol('y', positive=True)

These are then composed into expressions. 

    >>> expr = 2*x + y

And we query these expressions directly

    >>> expr.is_positive
    True

The expression and the attributes are woven into the same object.

### New Assumptions

In new assumptions variables and attributes are maintained separately.  

    >>> x = Symbol('x')
    >>> y = Symbol('y')

    >>> facts = Q.positive(x) & Q.positive(y)

The construction of mathematical expressions remains unchanged

    >>> expr = 2*x + y

But querying now requires two inputs, both the expression and the facts. 

    >>> ask(Q.positive(expr), facts)
    True

The separation of facts from expressions enables rich logical inference but it
requires the management of two separate variables, `expr` and `facts`, rather
than just one, `expr`.  It is difficult to consistently pass the extra variable
through all relevant function calls.

### Global assumptions

One solution to the management problem is to keep all facts in a globally accessible variable.  This removes the need to pass an extra argument between function calls.

This little known feature is already accessible in SymPy

    >>> # Setup
    >>> global_assumptions.add(Q.positive(x))
    >>> global_assumptions.add(Q.positive(y))

    >>> # Compute in this context
    >>> ask(Q.positive(2*x + y))
    True

Unfortunately global variables often cause confusion.  We will invariably add an experimental fact to the global collection and then forget to clean up, polluting future computations.  In this case we need to always remember to clean up after we're done.

    >>> # Cleanup
    >>> global_assumptions.remove(Q.positive(x))
    >>> global_assumptions.remove(Q.positive(y))

This cleanup step is both crucial and forgettable.  We can not trust ourselves
to remember it.

Introducing `assuming`
----------------------

Context managers provide the convenience of global variables with side-effect free security.  This is accomplished through consistent cleanup.

SymPy now includes, `assuming`, a context manager for mathematical assupmtions.  Here is an example

    >>> facts = Q.positive(x), Q.positive(y)

    >>> with assuming(*facts):
    ...     ask(Q.positive(2*x + y))
    True

Everything called from within the `with assuming` block has global-like access to the facts `Q.positive(x)` and `Q.positive(y)`.  These facts do not leak outside the `with` block.

