---
layout: post
title: A Weekend with Asyncio
category : work
tags : [scipy, Python, Programming, dask, blaze]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

*This work is supported by [Continuum Analytics](http://continuum.io)
and the [XDATA Program](http://www.darpa.mil/program/XDATA)
as part of the [Blaze Project](http://blaze.pydata.org)*

**tl;dr: I learned asyncio and rewrote part of dask.distributed with it; this
details my experience**


asyncio
-------

The [asyncio](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html) library provides
concurrent programming in the style of Go, Clojure's `core.async` library, or
more traditional libraries like Twisted.  Asyncio offers a programming paradigm
that lets many moving parts interact without involving separate threads.  These
separate parts explicitly yield control to each other and to a central
authority and then regain control as others yield control to them.  This lets
one escape traps like race conditions to shared state, a web of callbacks, lost
error reporting, and general confusion.

I'm not going to write too much about asyncio.  Instead I'm going to briefly
describe my problem, link to a solution, and then dive into good-and-bad points
about using `asyncio` while they're fresh in my mind.


Exercise
--------

*I won't actually discuss the application much after this section; you can
safely skip this.*

I decided to rewrite the
[`dask.distributed`](http://dask.pydata.org/en/latest/distributed.html) Worker using
asyncio.  This worker has to do the following:

1.  Store local data in a dictionary  (easy)
2.  Perform computations on that data as requested by a remote connection
    (act as a server in a client-server relationship)
3.  Collect data from other workers when we don't have all of the necessary
    data for a computation locally (peer-to-peer)
4.  Serve data to other workers who need our data for their own computations
    (peer-to-peer)

It's a sort of distributed RPC mechanism with peer-to-peer value sharing.
Metadata for who-has-what data is stored in a central metadata store; this
could be something like Redis.

The current implementation of this is a nest of threads, queues, and callbacks.
It's not bad and performs well but tends to be hard for others to develop.

Additionally I want to separate the worker code because it's useful outside of
`dask.distributed`.  Other distributed computation solutions exist in my head
that rely on this technology.

For the moment the code lives here:
[https://github.com/mrocklin/dist](https://github.com/mrocklin/dist).  I like
the design.  The [module-level docstring of
worker.py](https://github.com/mrocklin/dist/blob/master/dist/worker.py) is
short and informative.  But again, I'm not going to discuss the application
yet; instead, here are some thoughts on learning/developing with `asyncio`.


General Thoughts
----------------

*Disclaimer I am a novice concurrent programmer.  I write lots of parallel code
but little concurrent code.  I have never used existing frameworks like
Twisted.*

I liked the experience of using asyncio and recommend the paradigm to anyone
building concurrent applications.


#### The Good:

*   I can write complex code that involves multiple asynchronous calls,
    complex logic, and exception handling all in a single place.  Complex
    application logic is no longer spread in many places.
*   Debugging is much easier now that I can throw `import pdb; pdb.set_trace()`
    lines into my code and expect them to work (this fails when using threads).
*   My code fails more gracefully, further improving the debug experience.
    `Ctrl-C` works.
*   The paradigm shared by Go, Clojure's `core.async`, and Python's `asyncio`
    felt viscerally good.  I was able to reason well about my program as I was
    building it and made nice diagrams about explicitly which sequential
    processes interacted with which others over which channels.  I am much more
    confident of the correctness of the implementation and the design of my
    program.  However, after having gone through this exercise I suspect that I
    could now implement just about the same design without `asyncio`.  The
    design paradigm was perhaps as important as the library itself.
*   I have to support Python 2.  Fortunately I found the
    [trollius](https://trollius.readthedocs.org/) port of `asyncio` to be
    very usable.  It looks like it was a direct fork-then-modify of `tulip`.


#### The Bad:

*   There wasn't a ZeroMQ connectivity layer for Trollius (though
    [`aiozmq`](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiozmq) exists in Python 3) so I
    ended up having to use threads anyway for inter-node I/O.  This, combined
    with ZeroMQ's finicky behavior did mean that my program crashed hard
    sometimes.  I'm considering switching to plain sockets (which are supported
    nativel by Trollius and asyncio) due to this.
*   While exceptions raise cleanly I can't determine from where they originate.
    There are no line numbers or tracebacks.  Debugging in a concurrent
    environment is hard; my experience was definitely better than threads but
    still could be improved.  I hope that `asyncio` in Python 3.4 has better
    debugging support.
*   The API documentation is thorough but stackoverflow, general best
    practices, and example coverage is very sparse.  The project is new so
    there isn't much to go on.  I found that reading documentation for Go and
    presentations on Clojure's `core.async` were far more helpful in preparing
    me to use `asyncio` than any of the asyncio docs/presentations.


Future
------

I intend to pursue this into the future and, if the debugging experience is
better in Python 3 am considering rewriting the dask.distributed Scheduler in
Python 3 with asyncio proper.  This is possible because the Scheduler doesn't
have to be compatible with user code.

I found these videos to be useful:

1.  [Stuart Halloway on `core.async`](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VrmfuuHW_6w)
2.  [David Nolen on `core.async`](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AhxcGGeh5ho)
