---
layout: post
title: Where are you based?
tagline: Return to Austin
category: work
tags: []
theme: twitter
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Earlier this month I moved back to Austin.

People often ask where I'm based.  My location history over the past few years
has been a bit odd.  This blogpost is an attempt to record this history in an
effort to avoid repeating myself.

### Leaving NYC

I was based in NYC for several years, mostly due to my partner moving there at the time.
NYC is a fantastic city, but not great for those who prefer nature to people.


### Visiting California while starting NVIDIA

In 2019 I started a new position at NVIDIA.  When starting out I decided to fly
to California in order to on-board and get to know the company a bit better.
Officially starting in California also helped me get a slightly higher
salary (location-based pay is strange for remote workers).

However, the NVIDIA HQ is in Santa Clara, a city where I knew virtually no one,
while most of my friends and family were in the Oakland/Berkeley area.  As a
result I stayed in Santa Clara during the week, and then on Friday I would ride
my bike to the train, ride up to Berkeley, and work from there for a day with
the OSS crowd on the UC Berkeley campus.

This behavior got me into the pattern of living out of AirBnB using mostly a
road bike and Amtrak as transit.  This was surprisingly ok.


### Exploring LA and Austin

Eventually I decided to try to settle somewhere, knew that the SF Bay Area
wasn't for me (I had lived there for many years earlier, and knew that it
wasn't ideal).  I then spent some time in LA (thank you again Amtrak+Road
Bike) and Austin to try them out.


### Austin won

Austin had an intereesting confluence of traits that made me enjoy it.

1.  It's entirely walkable downtown
2.  It has excellent bike infrastructure
3.  It has excellent scooter infrastructure (people love or hate these, with
    reason.  I was disabled at the time, and scooters were A lifesaver).
4.  You can bike to a high-tech business scene, or to a swimming hole in about
    ten minutes.  This rapid fall-off of city-to-nature fit my personality well.
5.  It's socially progressive
6.  But maintains Texan character (arguably SF fared less well here)


So, I flew back to NYC, packed my things in boxes, and shipped them to Austin,
where I took up a lease.


### Business travel then took over

This was pre-covid.  I was managing a highly remote team, and also at
conferences 1-2 times a month.  Eventually it made more sense to live somewhat
nomadically.  I did this for about a year, until COVID hit.


### Quarantine in Southern California

Like single millenials during this period, I fled back to my suburban birthplace and lived with my parents for a year.

This was actually pretty awesome.  There is stigma in North American culture
about living with your parents.  People who do this are sometimes considered
unsuccessful.  As someone who, by some metrics at least, has been somewhat
successful, I'll happily wave the "live with your parents" flag.

I had spent prolonged periods with my parents before.  As the youngest child
and least geographically constrained, I'm often the one who swings by the
handle things when necessary, but I had never stayed with them this long.
Cross generational relationships are probably things that we should cultivate
more in our society.  My relationship with my parents has evolved considerably
during adulthood, but a prolonged duration of living together does achieve a
deeper growth on all sides I think.


### But eventually, it was time to move on

Earlier this month my parents were vaccinated (woo!) and I was feeling restless.

On February 5th I decided it would be a good idea to return to Texas.
On February 8th I got in a car and started the drive.
On February 10th I arrived back home.
I think I actually was looking forward to two days of the drive more than anything.
There is something very satisfying right now about a large-but-simple task that
doesn't require much brain power or decision making to make progress.


### Winter storm

It was cold when I arrived, but a week in I discovered that my return was
ill-timed, and Texas endured a crippling winter storm.  This was hard for many,
I emerged a bit thinner, but mostly unscathed.


### Home again

I've moved back into my building, picked up stuff stored at friends' houses,
and am looking forward to being here again.  Excitingly, I'm less disabled this
time around, and excited about exploring the nature that was only
semi-accessible before.
